Let’s play a little game shall we?
Put a finger down if you own a house.
Put another down if you have a car...paid in full.
Now put one down if you have a stable full time job.
And finally, put a finger down if you genuinely believe you’ll retire before 60.
If you find yourself in the 18-29 age range, chances are you’re not holding up a fist.
We joke, we scroll, we play, we party. We binge three seasons in one weekend and we send each other memes. From an onlooker’s perspective, we don’t care. We lack motivation, enthusiasm and ambition. We don’t protest enough, plan enough, save enough; we don’t seem worried enough. We’re labeled as “lazy” and “incompetent” by the older generations. The truth is much stranger than what’s visible on the surface : we care so much that many of us have become emotionally numb.

## I. Why we’re “chilling”

Since this generation appears to share the same consciousness and a collective experience, I would like to generalize our suffering.
With the advent of mental health diagnoses and the destigmatization of psychological disorders, Gen-z has had to embrace independence and autonomy in a harsh way. There were no systems put in place to prepare this group of people for the reality of life. Not counting the rapid degradation of the economy, the lack of mentorship, and the overall failure of previous generation vis à vis “building a better future for our kids”. Instead of making their own way in life, Gen-z is trying to live in a present that was supposed to be a better future - quote me. They are trying to fix the unrepairable damage caused by their parents and grandparents.
We ask ourselves “what are we supposed to do?”. This is the hand that we’ve been dealt. There’s no way to put back an onion that’s been chopped; you might as well whip up some curry. We make do. We find ways to dream big but not too big - within reason one might say. But the thoughts remain - the incessantness of worry. We fret about work, school, money, plans…the future. And if you didn’t know, let me tell you that constant panic is exhausting. So once more, we find ways to deal with it; we emulate coke fiends and are always on the lookout for our next dopamine hit.
Doomscrolling becomes an escape - a tunnel leading away from the endless spiral. We consume media (music, movies, anime…), we go to the gym, we party, we drink, masturbate, take actual drugs…anything to not feel anything. And above all, we make jokes about it online because despair isn’t exactly marketable.

%%more%%

II. The impossible checklist
Generally speaking, previous generations had a common plan they followed : graduate (high school) → get a job → marry someone → buy a house → have two and a half kids → retire in the country → die…a pretty unambiguous strategy. They had at their disposal resources that could facilitate their social ascension. A single income could often support an entire household. Today, two incomes sometimes struggle to cover rent. Unfortunately generation Z finds itself living through the antithesis of what once was. Graduate (university) → apply to 400 jobs → get rejected for various reasons (mainly because you lack 25 years of experience) → pay inane amounts of rent → watch podcasters telling you to wake up at 3am and “get on that grind” → die…eventually. The difference is pretty clear cut. Obviously this is a hyperbole; a caricature of an average member of our community. Many of this generation do not go through this - experiences differ greatly based on country, class and personal circumstances. BUT I believe a lot of you readers might recognize yourselves in this avid description of my life.

III. The cost - not financial
We go through a lot and it changes us deeply. Expectations are set early on in life by our elders (remember those who had it easy?) and failure to measure up results in more than just disappointment.
It delays our adulthood. Indeed, because we’re too busy failing, we don’t get to set realistic standards for adult life that factor in our current socio-political and economic climate. Most of us move out of childhood homes later in life; we put off mariage, kids, retirement…we postpone adulthood.
Additionally, a lot of us develop a phobia of commitment. Not just on a romantic level but also in our careers - we fear cementing ourselves on the wrong path. Buying anything, having children, signing a mortgage, planning five years ahead. We fear all those things because the future feels unstable
Furthermore - and this is a jab to myself - most of us start to acquire a penchant for existential nihilism. We joke about life’s lack of purpose and its meaninglessness while slowly starting to internalize that joke.
Our social lives deteriorate, we feel guilt at our lack of productivity and we feel left behind. The very escape we seek becomes another source of self-reproach. Comparison appears; jealousy and envy set in. Every scroll reminds you that someone your age has bought a house, started a business, married the love of their life, or retired their parents at 23 after discovering dropshipping. We know it's curated. We know it's fake. Yet comparison doesn't care. We ingest the lies it feeds us about more opulent standards of life and a threshold to achieve these “norms”. And to take our minds off of the shame, we relax a little more, sink a little further into the bed.

IV. Conclusion
Perhaps we aren’t at ease. Perhaps we’ve simply reached a point where worrying no longer changes anything. We’ve come to terms with it - c’est la vie some might say. So we laugh, we make memes, watch another episode, we tell ourselves that everything will work out somehow. Not because we believe that crap; au contraire because we know tomorrow is gonna come regardless. And it’ll come with yet another set of problems to solve. In the face of our own powerlessness, what else is there to do?

