As an African living in Africa, it was only after leaving Africa that I was made privy to how little Africans know of each other. I always thought it was a given to be educated on neighbouring countries - our cousins - and I was completely taken aback when I found the opposite to be true. If I were to ask anyone to name five African presidents, they most likely couldn’t. Five African authors, five rivers in Africa, or even five ethnic groups outside your own country. Now compare that to how easy it is for just about anyone to name American celebrities or scream out the capital of France.
Interacting with non-Sub-Saharan Africans was enlightening in showing me how insignificant Africa is to the rest of the world. I had to watch my Indian classmates not be able to remember what country I was from; I had professors refer to me solely as “the African” and so much more. Such ignorance was expected from those unfamiliar with the African experience; I did not hold their benightedness against them. Then I got to my own people…

The world in which we live has created a hierarchy of knowledge and I believe it’s very glaring that not all ignorance is punished equally. A person is ridiculed for not knowing about New York but nobody bats an eye if you’ve never heard of Ouagadougou. We don’t bother studying each other’s cultures, but we fear the lack of knowledge about the West - especially America; so we learn. We learn their history, their ways of life, their traditions (or lack thereof). We teach ourselves to talk and act like them; displaying traits so far detached from our own lived reality.
It is now mundane to be educated on the ways of the West; it’s considered ‘niche’ and special to have even the sliver of an idea about African cultures.
What is with this western obsession? Where does the embarrassment and innate fear of ignorance towards the West come from? Why do we brag about our eloquence vis-à-vis our colonizers? We grow up not knowing sufficiently about our cousin cultures, but seek some sort of invisible praise when “understanding” of America and its subsidiaries is displayed.

%%more%%

One might argue that it is the West’s fault that we know so much. They constantly shove their lifestyles down our throats - mostly through media - and we have no other choice but to swallow.
It’s also very important to acknowledge the centuries of colonial education systems which are still being used today; they contain almost exclusively tales of western dominance. History is taught with the main character never being African. Focus is put on western philosophy, Greek mythology, Latin, and Germanic linguistic traditions, and so on and so forth.
Nevertheless, exposure alone does not justify the neglect we give our own home. Influence does not equal inevitability. I refute the argument above by asserting that we chose to swallow. We chose to ingest whatever bullshit they fed us throughout our lives. We decided as a collective that learning about the West was way more important than learning about ourselves. Our choices were indeed shaped by history, but at the end of the day they’re still choices.

But how do we decide which concepts become universal truths? Who decides what knowledge is worth preserving and what knowledge is disposable? The thing about concepts is : they can be an axiom or not…just like God but that’s a debate for another day. One of the first institutions that teaches us what deserves value is the school system.
Going to school means being ceaselessly exposed to several different notions. Yet how many of us remember all that we’ve been taught? How many of us remember the periodic table, or the Pythagorean theorem or even which metal has the highest density? See what I mean? We pick and choose what information to keep.
But what concerns me isn’t that we forget information…that’s normal…that’s human. What worries me is what we are taught to remember in the first place.

This selective preservation of knowledge extends beyond textbooks. It exists in the very languages we use to communicate. My blood boils just thinking about how speaking perfect English is admired more than speaking Wolof, Ewondo, Akoseu, or Igbo. Why is French ‘sophistication’ but indigenous languages are ‘local’?

I concede that these are very imbedded practices, but we live in a “post colonial” age where we benefit of “freedom”. Freedom of choice. Whether to remain mentally enslaved, or to break free from those shackles and lo and behold, we picked a side. We chose to discard - no scratch that - we decided to not even bother to learn about Africa. Our home. Our family.
Ignorance rarely remains harmless; once people become strangers, fear settles in and suspicion replaces familiarity. I believe it was Tomura Shigaraki who once said “misunderstandings lead to fear and rejection.” Distance breeds distrust. We stop seeing neighbours and start seeing outsiders, unknowns, ‘those people’. And it’s that ignorance, that stupidity (if I could put it like that) that leads to places and situations like what South Africa is facing. A country where xenophobia and Afrophobia are considered the norm; where praise for the ‘white man’ is abundant; where spaces don’t exist for individuals indistinguishable from its citizens…a country where the people are under what can only be described as collective psychosis.

I would like to end this rant with a disclaimer. This is in no way, shape or form an accusation or reproach. It’s an observation of the universal African experience. I too briefly fell prey to the ‘American dream’ and western conditioning. Luckily for me, I had a father who was very set on educating me about our people and a mother who’s specialty as a teacher is African philosophy. But it just takes the will to learn; the will to understand; the will to rewire our shared consciousness.
I’m not trying to be MLK but I too have a dream. I dream of an Africa where a Kenyan child learns about Mali with the same enthusiasm afforded to America. Where a Cameroonian can recognise Zimbabwean literature as readily as Hollywood actors. Where our curiosity points inward before it sails across the Atlantic. Perhaps the first step toward Pan-Africanism isn’t political at all. I believe it’s choosing to know and accept one another; because at the end of the day you can’t unite a people you refuse to know.